# Protocals configureations 
*  
   - Telnet 
   - SSH 

### Telnet configure 

* telnet is the standard TCP/IP protocol for virtual terminal service. while SSH or secure Shell is a program to log into another computer over a network to ececute commands in a remote machine. telnet is vulnerable to security attacks, while SSH helps you overcome many of Telnet's security issues.

* what is purpose using SVI(switch virtual interface)
    * we are using the remotely connected to the switch
    * we are assign the ip address of the switch 
    * either we are using on telnet protocol or SSH 

* in Layer 2 switch, there is switch virtual interface (SVI) that provides a means for remotely the device 
* we need to set password on previliage mode

Q. Which interface allows remote management of a Layer 2 switch?
Q. A technician configure a switch with these commands 

LAB SETUP 

```
Switch> en
Switch# 
Switch# show running-config
Switch# show vlan
Switch# config t
Switch(config)# 
Switch(config)# interface vlan 1 
Switch(config-if)#ip address 192.168.1.100 255.255.255.0
Switch(config-if)# no sh
Switch(config-if)# exit 

# remote connection is establish 
Switch# show running-config
Switch# config t 
Switch(config)# line vty 4 # Switch(config)# line vty 0 4
Switch(config-line)# password switch 
Switch(config-line)# no login 
Switch(config-line)# exit
Switch(config)# 

# test the connection on PC, in commandline prompt 

telnet 192.168.1.100 

# set the password
Switch# config t 
Switch(config)# enable secret cisco 
# agin connect to pc 
telnet 192.168.1.100 

```

# Remote Server Access Using SSH 

#### How to Configure SSH on SWITCH or Router 

* **objectives:**
    * How SSH is so powerfull than telnet 
    * interview questions on SSH 
    * Learn The complete Procedure before configurations
    * configure SSH On Router or Switch 
    * Access Remote server From end Devices 

* **How is SSH different from Telnet?**
    * SSH makes connections over the network whereas is for out-of-band access.
    * SSH provides security to remote sessions by encrypting message and using user authentication. Telnet is considered insecure and sends messages in plaintext 
    * SSH requires the use of the PUTTY terminal emulation program. Tera Term must be used to connect to devices through the use of telnet 
    * SSH must be configured over an active network connection. whereas Telnet is used to connect to a device from a console connection


# Enable SSH 

telnet simplifies remote device access, but it is not secure. Data contained within this reason, it is highly recommended to enable Secure Shell(SSH) on devices for secure remote access.

* it is possiable to configure a Cisco device to support SSH using the following six steps 


* **Step-1: Configure a unique device hostname.**
    *  A device must have a unique hostname other than the default.
* **Stpe-2: Configure the IP domain name.**
    * Configure the IP doamin name of the network by using the global configuration mode command up *ip domain name* name.
* **Step-3: Generate a key to encrypt SSH traffic**
    * SSH encrypts traffic between source and destination, However to do so a unique authentications key must be generated by using the global configuration command *crypto key generate rsa genaral-keys modulus bits*. The modulues bits determines the size of the key and can be configured from 360 bits to 2046 bits larger the bit value, the more secure the key. Howerver larger bit values also take longer to encrypt and decrypt information The minimum recommended modules length is 1024 bits.
* **Step 4: Verify or create a local database entry:** Create a local database username entry using the *username* gloabl 

* **Step-5: Authentic against the local database**
    * use the *login local* line configuration command to authenticate the *vty* line against the local database

* **Step-6 Enable vty inbound SSH sessions**
    * By default, no input session is allowed on vty lines. You can specify multiple input protocols including Telnet and SSH using the *transport input {ssh | telnet}* command.


#### setup on SSH 

```
# assigin the IP in router and desktop using console-cable 
# set the password on previlage ESEC mode
Router# config t 
Router# enable secret Cisco 
Router(config)# hostname R1
R1(config)# ip domain-name cisco.com
R1(config)# crypto key generate rsa 
The name for the keys will be: R1.span.com % The key modulus size is 1024 bits % Generating 1024 bit RSA keys, keys will be non-exportable ---[ok]
subscribe(config)# username abs secret abc 
R1(config)#
R1(config)# line vty 0 4
R1(config-line)# login local
R1(config-line)# transport input ssh
R1(config-line)# exit
R1(config)# 
```

login command: `ssh -l <username> <IP address>`


### Packet Tracer - Configure Secure Passwords and SSH 

* **RTA(ROUTER)**
    * Interface: 
    * Ip Address: 172.16.1.1
    * Subnet Mask: 255.255.255.0
    * Default Gateway: 
* * **PCA**
    * Interface: NIC
    * Ip Address: 172.16.1.10
    * Subnet Mask: 255.255.255.0
    * Default Gateway: 172.16.1.1
* * **SW1**
    * Interface: VLAN1
    * Ip Address: 172.16.1.2
    * Subnet Mask: 255.255.255.0
    * Default Gateway: 172.16.1.1

### Intructions

#### Step-1: Configure Basics Security on the Router 
1. Configure IP addressing on *PCA* according to the Addressing Table.
2. Console into RTA from the terminal on PCA
3. configure the hostname as *RTA*
4. Configure IP Addressing on RTA and enable the interface.
5. Encrypt all plaintext passwords.
   1. `RTA(config)# Service password-encryption`
6. Set a strong secret password of your choosing 
   1. Note: Choose a password that you will remember or you will need reset the activity if you are locked out of the device.
7. Disable DNS lookup.
   1. `RTA(config)# no ip domain-lookup`
8. Set the domain name to *ccna.com*
   1. `RTA(config)# ip domain-name CCNA.com`
9. Create a user of your choosing with a strong encrypted password
   1.  `RTA(config)# username <user> secret <password>`
10. Genarative 1024 bits RSA keys `RTA(config)# crypto key generate rsa `
11. 